---
layout: post
title: Privacy in the European Union and the United States
categories: writing
source-thumb: '/images/logos/cyber.png'
source-name: University of Oxford Cyber Security Centre
source-url: 'http://www.cybersecurity.ox.ac.uk/'
---

## Introduction

Collectively, the United States and the 28 nations that make up the
European Union are home to less than 12 percent of the world’s
population and only 23 percent of the world’s Internet users.[^1][^2]
However, since many of the largest and most widely-used Internet
companies are American and the E.U. has taken a relatively aggressive
regulatory stance in favor of protecting consumer privacy, the two
regions have an outsize influence in how privacy is understood and
protected online around the world. [^3]

Privacy, as both a philosophical and legal concept, can be ambiguous and
difficult to define, and the limits to what does or does not constitute
privacy have been further blurred by the advent of digital information
storage, sharing, and processing.[^4] Nevertheless, establishing a
concrete understanding of privacy in an online context is important to
any discussion of privacy regulation. To compare understanding and
regulation of privacy in the E.U. and the U.S., this paper will use
Daniel Solove’s information-based definition of privacy, which separates
the idea of privacy into four broad, related categories: information
collection, information processing, information dissemination, and
invasion.[^5] This framework is well-suited for understanding privacy in
a digital context because it envisions privacy not as a vague,
overarching philosophical concept but as a set of discrete issues
relating directly to information and its use.

This sort of informational privacy gives individuals space to develop
ideas and ownership over their personal information, which can benefit
individuals directly but also democratic society more broadly.[^6] For
all its individual and social benefits, however, privacy is not an
absolute good: protecting privacy can also infringe on individual rights
like freedom of speech, limit businesses’ ability to fully use their
technological capabilities, and pose a threat to individual and national
safety and security.[^7] Accordingly, it is not surprising that
countries approach balancing these tradeoffs differently.

In general, governments of European Union states have aggressively
pursued regulations that limit how companies can use personal data they
collect online, while the United States has taken a more *laissez-faire*
approach, usually allowing companies to self-regulate unless they are
collecting specific types of sensitive information, like medical records
or data about children.[^7] As individuals and corporations in the E.U.
and the U.S. continue to interact and do business across national
borders, however, understanding and reconciling these different
approaches to privacy in each region will become increasingly important.

This paper examines historical and current approaches to protecting
consumer privacy online in the European Union as compared to the United
States, and seeks to find consensus around policies that balance privacy
protection with other important interests.

## Privacy in the European Union

European societies tend to have a stronger cultural expectation of
privacy than the United States does,[^8] and European legal discussion
of online privacy therefore focuses more specifically on "data
protection” than in the U.S.[^9] Indeed, the Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the European Union enumerates both "respect for private and
family life” and "protection of personal data” — rights not explicitly
granted in the United States Constitution — as fundamental freedoms
afforded to European citizens.[^10]

### The 1995 E.U. Data Privacy Directive

In 1995, the European Commission, fulfilling its mandate to protect its
citizens’ fundamental rights and envisioning a future where "economic
and social integration… will necessarily lead to a substantial increase
in cross-border flows of personal data between all those involved… in
economic and social activity in the Member States,”[^9] addressed
Directive 95/46/EC, the "data privacy directive," to E.U. member states.
The directive sought to harmonize data privacy laws among E.U.
countries, and in doing so established broad levels of minimum
protection for personal data.[^7]

The directive defines personal data as "any information relating to an
identified or identifiable natural person," and delineates strict limits
to the processing of such data.[^9] Specifically, data processing must
be "legitimate," meaning either that the subject has given explicit,
informed consent, or that the processing is necessary to comply with a
contractual or legal obligation, and it must be transparent, meaning
that the subject knows how and by whom the data is being processed. The
directive also provides further restrictions on processing sensitive
personal information such as religious beliefs, political views, or
health.

### The "Right to be Forgotten” and the proposed General Data Protection Regulation

In 2014, a landmark ruling by the Court of Justice of the European Union
found that the 1995 Data Protection Directive afforded citizens a
limited right to be forgotten: in certain cases, individuals can legally
request that search engines remove links to personal information that is
"inaccurate, inadequate, irrelevant, or excessive.”[^11] The decision
was highly controversial because it arguably elevated privacy concerns
above freedom of speech and press, and has implications beyond just the
E.U., especially for foreign companies doing business in Europe.[^12]

Now, the European Commission is seeking to update the 1995 Data
Protection Directive and unify data protection within the E.U. under a
single set of proposed new rules: the General Data Protection Regulation.[^13]
Unlike a directive, this proposed regulation would take effect
immediately if enacted, without additional action by member states. The
regulation seeks to increase accountability for companies handling data,
improve reporting of data breaches, provide users with easier access to
and increased control over their data, and codify the new right to be
forgotten (also referred to as a "right to erasure”). Importantly, these
new rules will also explicitly apply to data that is handled abroad by
foreign companies offering services to E.U. citizens.[^13]

## Privacy in the United States

Unlike in Europe, the United States Constitution does not protect
privacy as a fundamental right. Furthermore, even though some specific
types of privacy are constitutionally protected — the Fourth Amendment’s
prohibition of illegal search and seizures, for example — other rights
that can sometimes directly conflict with privacy are explicitly
protected as well, like the right to free speech or a free press.[^7]
Accordingly, the U.S. is unlikely to ever fully adopt privacy
protections to the same extent Europe has.

Instead of having one expansive, European-style privacy law, the U.S.
has instead regulated privacy more sporadically and reactively.
Individual legislative acts, like the Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act or the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act, regulate privacy in specific settings but do not apply
more broadly.[^7] Furthermore, some individual states have passed their
own privacy legislation that applies only within state borders:
California’s Online Privacy Protection Act is a notable example not only
for its broad scope, but also because the state is home to many of the
largest global technology companies, including Google, Facebook,
Twitter, Apple, and others.[^14]

U.S. companies also face the threat of class-action lawsuits, and
accordingly are self-motivated to publish privacy policies that are
transparent enough to avoid accusations of misleading customers.[^8] In
general though, in the U.S., whoever has unrestricted access to data
owns it, unless otherwise specifically prohibited.[^15]

## Moving forward without moving backward

While many of Europe’s proposed privacy reforms offer sensible solutions
to problems created by the changing nature of online data processing
— centralizing regulatory authority, for example, or improving data
breach reporting — some of them also risk overstepping the E.U.’s
authority and creating dangerous precedents for international regulation
of online services.

American officials and companies are especially worried. The *New York
Times* called the proposed rules "deeply troubling," especially the
requirement that companies complying with link removal requests remove
them worldwide, not just in the single applicable country, and warned
they could lead to censorship attempts by more autocratic governments. [^12]
U.S. President Barack Obama even went as far as to deride the
proposed regulations as nothing more than technological protectionism,
aiming to give unfair advantages to European companies who otherwise
would not be able to compete against the American companies that
"created, expanded, and perfected [the Internet] in ways that [European
companies] can’t compete” with.[^16]

Of course, claims of protectionism and censorship, though justified, are
also somewhat exaggerated: there are compelling reasons for many of the
E.U.’s proposed regulations. However, these arguments to highlight the
danger of one region moving unilaterally to protect privacy so
aggressively.

At the same time, the U.S. should probably implement some level of
broader privacy protections, especially as foreign users, companies, and
countries have grown suspicious of American companies’ complicity in
National Security Agency surveillance operations. The Obama
Administration’s proposed Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights Act, though
unlikely to be seriously considered by Congress, offers a promising
start. The Act, modelled loosely on existing E.U. rules, would entitle
consumers to transparency, individual control, respect for context,
limited collection, responsible use, security, access, accuracy and
accountability.[^17] In Congress, there is also bipartisan support for a
bill that would enshrine open international data flows as a key aspect
of U.S. trade negotiations.[^18][^19] Coupling broader privacy
protections in the U.S. with international agreements to maintain open
data flows could be one promising way to reach a compromise between
European and American interests.

## Conclusion

Ultimately, maintaining an open and international Internet requires
trust, both between users and companies, and among governments of
different countries. Regulators who view data protection policies as
critical for protecting a fundamental individual right and corporations
who view them as unecessary red tape impeding commerce will need to
reach some sort of middle ground if they want to protect privacy while
also fostering continued innovation.

At its core, the Internet is about connecting people and information,
and using the Internet to communicate inherently requires some sacrifice
of privacy. The challenge for government regulators, then, is to limit
privacy violations without also limiting the functionality and untapped
potential of the Internet. While the E.U.’s existing and proposed
privacy protections are for the most part effective and justified, the
E.U. risks overstepping as a regional governing body by attempting to
highly regulate data flows internationally. At the same time, the U.S.
should improve its own consumer privacy protections as it seeks to work
with Europe to protect an open Internet.

**Works Cited**

[^1]: "Population and population change statistics," ed: Eurostat, European Commission, 2015.

[^2]: "Life Online," ed: Digital Agenda for Europe, European Commission, 2012.

[^3]: "Leading social networks worldwide as of March 2015, ranked by number of active users (in millions)," ed: Statista, 2015.

[^4]: J. DeCew, "Privacy," in *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*, E. N. Zalta, Ed., Spring 2015 ed Stanford, 2015.

[^5]: D. J. Solove, "A Taxonomy of Privacy," *University of Pennsylvania Law Review,* pp. 477-564, 2006.

[^6]: F. H. Cate, *Privacy in the information age*: Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 1997.

[^7]: J. M. Fromholz, "The European Union Data Privacy Directive," *Berkeley Technology Law Journal,* vol. 15, pp. 461-484, 2000.

[^8]: P. Lee, "How do EU and US privacy regimes compare?," in *Privacy and Information Law* vol. 2015, ed: Field Fisher Waterhouse LLP, 2014.

[^9]: "Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data," *Official Journal of the European Communities,* vol. L281, p. 31, 1995.

[^10]: "Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union," *Official Journal of the European Union,* vol. C 83, p. 389, 2010.

[^11]: S. Schechner, "Factsheet on the "Right to be Forgotten" ruling (C-131/12)," ed: European Commission Directorate-General for Justice and Consumers, 2014.

[^12]: New York Times Editorial Board, "Europe’s Expanding ‘Right to Be Forgotten’ " in *The New York Times*, ed, 2015.

[^13]: European Commission, "Commission proposes a comprehensive reform of data protection rules to increase users' control of their data and to cut costs for businesses," ed. Brussels, 2012.

[^14]: Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, "California's Online Privacy Protection Act Goes into Effect July 1: Requires Internet Merchants to Post a Privacy Policy," ed, 2004.

[^15]: C. Laux, "Privacy Concepts: US v. EU," in *The Center for Internet and Society* vol. 2015, ed: Stanford Law School, 2007.

[^16]: M. Ahmed, D. Robinson, and R. Waters, "Obama attacks Europe over technology protectionism," in *The Financial Times*, ed. London, 2015.

[^17]: "Administration Discussion Draft: Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights Act," ed: The White House, 2015.

[^18]: S. Schechner, W. Mauldin, and F. Robinson, "Online Privacy Could Spark U.S.-EU Trade Rift," in *The Wall Street Journal*, ed. New York: Dow Jones & Company, Inc., 2014.

[^19]: J. R. Reidenberg and T. H. Davenport, "Should the U.S. Adopt European-Style Data-Privacy Protections?," in *The Wall Street Journal*, ed. New York: Dow Jones & Company, Inc., 2013.
