---
layout: post
title: 'A Return to Great Power Rivalries?'
categories: writing
noun: paper
source-thumb: '/images/logos/stanford.png'
source-name: 'Challenges and Dilemmas in American Foreign Policy (POLISCI 214R)'
---

The United States is without question the preeminent global superpower. Its economy is the world's largest, and its military the most sophisticated.[^1] American strength is backed by a wealthy, educated population and a dynamic, democratic political system that has endured centuries of challenges. Still, US hegemony does not mean that its power is unchecked or its influence unchallenged. Recently, increasingly assertive behavior by both Russia and China has called America's dominance into question, and raised the prospect of renewed rivalry between the world's great powers. Ultimately, while these new challenges will require vigilance and engagement from the United States and its allies, neither country is at risk of entering a serious protracted rivalry with the United States: Russia lacks the power to do so, and China the motive.

States derive power from a range of sources. A state is defined primarily by its territory, and the land, water, and natural resources that it controls form the basis of its power. The size, demographics, and education of a state's population add another dimension, and in turn help determine the strength and potential of its economy. Military capability, enabled by economic capacity and stable political institutions, is the most direct manifestation of a state's power. Finally, economic, military, and geopolitical power can be augmented by cultural, ideological, and diplomatic influence. Certain states, such as the United States, Japan, China, Russia, the UK, France, Germany, and a few others, possess sufficient power to exert influence on a global scale. Throughout history, there have been periods of intense rivalry between these great powers, most notably the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union. Now, two decades after that conflict ended, there is concern that economic change and a reshuffling of state power may lead to renewed rivalry between the United States and other major states. In addition to the range of threats posed by non-state actors, two states in particular are poised to challenge the United States and the international order it has built since the conclusion of World War II: Russia and China. It is important to consider the two separately, however, as each presents very different risks.

Russia has a long history as one of Europe's dominant powers. Recently, Putin has stoked the embers of Cold War animosity between Russia and the West with aggressive actions in Ukraine and Syria. Still, Russia's gross domestic product is a few hundred billion dollars less than California's.[^2] The Russian economy never fully modernized after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the dominant energy sector, which had until recently concealed chronic malaise in other parts of the economy, has been debilitated by the global oil glut.[^3] Russia's lagging economy has not deterred Putin from aggressive actions in Europe and the Middle East, though --- if anything, it has encouraged them --- and Russia's foreign meddling has actually been moderately successful, at least in the short term. In Syria, Russia has propped up the brutal Assad regime, first by blocking UN Security Council action and funneling money and arms to Assad's government, and more recently with direct military intervention.[^4] In Europe, Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine in a brazen territory grab that blatantly violated decades of international law and precedent.[^5] In both cases, Russia's opportunistic belligerence has been enabled by passive responses from the United States and its allies --- especially in Syria.

Aggression and opportunism, however, should not be equated with power. Putin has pushed the limits of the international system, exerting Russia's influence and resisting the world order established by the United States and its allies. This has brought him huge popularity at home but won him few friends abroad. Moscow has shown its willingness to flout international law and to ruthlessly prioritize its own interests over human rights and other widely-accepted norms. These tendencies are dangerous. They do not, however, mark the start of a renewed Cold War between the United States and Russia, where the risk of conflict between the two powers could pose an existential threat to each side and its allies. On the contrary, they represent a limited attempt by Putin to compensate for economic stagnation at home, and to push back against the growing power and influence of the United States, the European Union, NATO, and the liberal democratic future these entities promote.

China, by contrast, derives its power not only from its historical legacy and geopolitical position, but also, and most importantly, from its rapidly expanding economy. Staggering economic growth has allowed China to modernize its military and given Beijing the standing to exert itself more forcefully on the international stage, causing concern that China's accumulating power will enable it to challenge the international order currently dominated by the United States. In the long term, China's demographics, economic capacity, territory, and regional influence give it the potential to be a greater threat to the United States and its interest then Russia. Fortunately, though, China's interests are primarily economic and not ideological, which means that its rise can be productively channeled, and its growing influence accommodated by an evolving international system --- as long as the established powers are willing to cooperate and engage.

At present, China is exerting its growing power to challenge the status quo in two ways. First, it is asserting claims to contested islands in the South and East China Seas. Ownership of these islands would give China control over valuable shipping lanes --- 30 percent of the world's shipping traffic passes through these contested waters, for example --- and also increase the People's Liberation Army's ability to defend China's economic interests in case of war.[^6] China's current posturing regarding these islands is dangerous, and the international community should not allow them to be taken by force, in violation of international law. At the same time, though, other states should recognize China's legitimate economic interests and desire to control its commercial thoroughfares, and work with China to find an alternate solution that gives China greater autonomy.

Second, China is investing heavily in infrastructure throughout Asia, through the new Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and the "One Belt, One Road" initiative. Concerns that these economic developments represent a long-term strategic threat to the United States and its interests, however, are significantly overstated. The Chinese government's overarching strategic goal is to foster continued economic development and political stability, which means that China's foreign priorities are to protect its sources of energy and to expand markets for its exports. The AIIB, founded as an Asian counterweight to the international financial institutions controlled by the US, the EU, and Japan, is an important element in this strategy, and established powers should welcome China's contribution towards global economic development --- especially since the money seeding the new development bank could just have easily been put to use developing China's military capabilities instead.[^7] Additionally, concerns that this new bank will undermine the longstanding focus on neoliberal institution-building as a core pillar of development finance would be more justified if it were proven that conditionalities actually resulted in better outcomes and democratization; in fact, it is still wholly possible that China's politics-blind approach to development might, in the long term, be effective at leading not only to economic development but also to political stability. Finally, it is important to note that China's dominance in Asia is contested, and the United States can partner with other Asian states, as it has with the new Trans-Pacific Partnership, to counter China's growing influence [^8].

On balance, neither the actions of Russia nor those of China point to a period of renewed rivalry between the world's great powers. The United States and its Western allies still have the world's strongest economies and militaries, and dominate established international institutions. Russia and China are competing with the United States for influence in their respective regions, but do not seek or offer a realistic alternative world order in which they would dominate --- they resist the status quo at the margins, but rarely enter direct conflict with the United States or its allies.

Additionally, a growing range of future threats transcends state borders and will force even great powers with competing interests to collaborate. Over the past century, economies have become increasingly globalized, with capital flows and free trade linking companies, workers, and consumers around the world. In this context, multinational corporations and industrial groups will play a growing role --- already, many large companies have revenues that rival the GDPs of some developed countries.[^9] Moreover, the accelerating pace of technological development will make companies and governments increasingly vulnerable to cyber-attacks, an asymmetric threat that makes even the largest institutions vulnerable. Climate change and the accompanying rise in sea levels and increase in natural disasters will challenge entire regions and force at least some degree of international cooperation, especially as poorer countries are hit hardest. Finally, the spread of Islamic extremism and the danger of stateless networks of terrorists will require military and intelligence cooperation against this mutual threat.

Ultimately, then United States has the military strength, economic dynamism, and global legitimacy to maintain its status as the world's only dominant superpower, but doing so will require active engagement. Even if the authoritarian regimes in Russia and China maintain power, which is far from guaranteed, competition can benefit all parties if channeled productively. To be sure, the United States cannot rest on its laurels, but neither should it concern itself too much over the possibility of a new Cold War with either Russia or China. Through vigilance, engagement, and reasonable accommodation, the United States can maintain its status as the world's clear hegemon for the foreseeable future.


## Sources

[^1]: W. R. Mead and H. Z. Cohen, "The Eight Great Powers of 2016: Iran Joins the Club," *The American Interest*, 26 January 2016.
[^2]:J. Garosi and J. Sisney, *California Is the World's Eighth Largest Economy*, Sacramento, California: California Legislative Analyst's Office, 2014.
[^3]: The Economist, Phase two: Russia’s economic problems move from the acute to the chronic, London: *The Economist*, 2016.
[^4]: S. Simon, "A Syrian Awakening," *Foreign Affairs*, 25 October 2015.
[^5]: M. McFaul, "Putin the (Not So) Great," *POLITICO Magazine*, 4 August 2014.
[^6]: "The South China Sea: Sunnylands and cloudy waters," *The Economist*, 20 February 2015.
[^7]: P. Lipscy, "Who's Afraid of the AIIB," *Foreign Affairs*, 7 May 2015.
[^8]: S. Mirski, "The Trans-Pacific Partnership: China, America and the Balance of Power," *The National Interest*, 6 July 2015.
[^9]: C. Schumacher, Walmart announces Q4 underlying1 EPS of $1.61 and additional strategic investments in people & e-commerce, Bentonville, Arkansas: Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 2015.
